[Music]
hey everyone welcome to the Peter Atia
drive I'm your host Peter Atia the drive
is a result of my hunger for optimizing
performance health longevity critical
thinking along with a few other
obsessions along the way I've spent the
last several years working with some of
the most successful top performing
individuals in the world and this
podcast is my attempt to synthesize what
I've learned along the way to help you
live a higher quality more fulfilling
life if you enjoy this podcast you can
find more information on today's episode
and other topics at Peter via MD comm
hey everybody welcome to this week's
episode of the drive my guest this week
is Sid Mukherjee who is a remarkable
writer in fact a Pulitzer Prize winning
writer in a remarkable physician and
scientist in fact probably there's
nobody I know that combines those three
things as efficaciously as Sid does his
biography reads like I'm making it up he
studied biology at Stanford he then
became a Rhodes Scholar went to Oxford
earned his PhD in immunology returned to
the United States to earn his MD at
Harvard etc etc etc fast forward to
today he is an associate professor of
medicine in the division of hematology
and oncology at Columbia University
which is where we met to do this
interview he has published also and
continues to publish consistently in
both The New Yorker and the New York
Times which and of itself is quite a
distinction as I would learn typically
one is on either side of those but not
both and of course he's published in New
England Journal of Medicine nature in
addition to a whole host of other
medical journals
I met Sid by five years ago at a dinner
that was set up by Luc Antley someone
I'll be interviewing very shortly who
will be a guest obviously soon and while
I remember that dinner very well I was
surprised to learn that it left such an
impression on Sid and he described it as
something to the effect of one of the
most interesting and perhaps important
scientific collaborations in his life
that stemmed from it as we kind of
jotted out a napkin experiment that went
on to become a paper that was published
by a group led by Lou and
and that paper was published this past
summer and we talked about that in
detail that paper involved the use of
ketogenic diets in combination with a
class of drugs called pi3 kinase
inhibitors we're gonna go into great
detail on that so I obviously don't want
to repeat any of that stuff here but I
think for those of you that are
interested in cancer you're obviously
gonna find this episode very interesting
but the other thing we had said is it
doesn't matter if you have no interest
in cancer I think you'll find this
discussion interesting because say it
has a way of making everything
interesting and that to me is part of
SIDS gift when I got his book the gene
in the summer of 2016 when it came out
it's one of probably only six books in
my life that I was not able to stop
reading from the moment I started so
it's one of those things where
everything else I was doing had to be
put aside for a few days until I could
finish that book that's just the way
said writes and it's also the way he
speaks he is a unique human being and I
think that will come across in this
interview the other thing that was a
total pleasant surprise to me was in
doing the research for this podcast was
coming across a book that I was ashamed
to admit I didn't even know he'd written
called the laws of medicine or that's
big it's called the Three Laws of
medicine and we talk about these three
laws and rather than even stating them
now I just think it's worth this podcast
is worth the price of admission just on
the basis of understanding those three
laws so with that I hope you will
welcome Sid to the show and I do want to
just remind folks to please sign up for
the email list I've been putting a lot
of effort into those emails every Sunday
morning they go out and I hope that
they're at least worth some value I
think they are and I like to be able to
kind of share things with folks that I'm
reading or seeing along the way and they
don't always have to do with longevity
keep in mind one of the things that I
think takes up more actual time than
anything else with respect to this
podcast is putting together the show
notes so Bob and Travis work really hard
on those and the feedback we've been
getting is incredible people keep saying
my god how do you make these things and
the short answer is I don't I don't do
any of it but Bob and Travis do
especially Travis and I think that if
you spend a few minutes looking at that
stuff especially if you find some of the
content challenging and when we get into
technical terms which we do on some of
the pod
you're pretty much gonna find everything
in the shownotes lastly if you're
enjoying this it would be an honor if
you would head on over to Apple podcast
reviews and leave us a review especially
if it's a positive one but we'll take a
negative one too as long as you can be
constructive in your feedback so without
further delay here is my guest today Sid
Mukerjee hey sit thanks for making time
my pleasure
thanks for being here yeah I don't get
up to this part of the city very often
so if I hike well it's a massive Medical
School and it's hard to imagine it
anywhere else except for uptown in this
way you know we go right all the way to
the river it's amazing and the last time
I was up here was to see another one of
your colleagues on the other side of the
street Rudy Leibel who's a good friend
and I used to be up here a lot more
often so it was nice to come back most
of our podcasts go really really long
this one I don't think we have that
luxury of time so I kind of want to get
right into things but before we do I
certainly think for the listener who
doesn't know you well your your
background which I'll allude to a lot in
the introductions we don't spend too
much time on it but you grew up in India
came to the u.s. did you do college here
or I went to college at Stanford yeah oh
that's right you went undergrad at
Stanford okay then Medical School at
Harvard actually then in the middle I
was away for three years I did a little
road scholarship yeah you're a Rhodes
Scholar yeah I was it was called and
that's where I got my PhD and my PhD is
in immunology mm-hmm
which is a subject that I left behind I
went to medical school at Harvard
Medical School then did my fellowship my
internship my residency at Mass General
Hospital fellowship at the Dana Farber
Cancer Institute and then started my own
lab and clinical practice at Columbia
University and have come back to
immunology in a strange wide widening
circle of the way yeah the first time we
met was a dinner that Luke and Lee had
planned for us as about three or four
years ago and I remember at the time the
topic that Lou is passionate about that
I'm passionate about was sort of
metabolism of cancer and at the time I
wasn't something that seemed as
interesting to you as it is today and I
know today I want to talk so much more
about that because the work you guys
have done in the last few years is in
many ways what I think is the most
interesting stuff to talk about it was
also a tough dinner because you don't
eat most things
it's hard to have dinner with someone
when you went half the menus off the
menu so anyway we somehow managed and
scraped by and it was a wonderful
evening actually led to what was that
five years ago yeah led to one of the
most interesting and perhaps important
scientific collaborations in my life
with Lou Lou but it was at that dinner
which we kind of hammered it was in a
Japanese restaurant on the Upper East
Side in a tiny little place you remember
I that's exactly I know exactly exactly
it was well because we wrote on it you
know it was a little bit like one of
these napkin experiments where you write
on a napkin an idea and that idea takes
five years to come alive this thing that
was sketched on a napkin that evening
and is now leading to a actually kind of
a massive clinical trial across multiple
sites very energetic teams coming in to
all of this out of that little napkin on
Japanese restaurant yeah that was a
really fun night prior to that I had
read the Emperor of all maladies I don't
think the gene was out yet the gene was
not out yet I want to spend just a
couple minutes on the Emperor of all
maladies because if there's anybody
listening to this who hasn't read it you
won the Pulitzer Prize for that book I
believe I did yes yeah so it's it's a
must read having myself studied in
oncology there were so much that I
learned you know I trained at Hopkins
which is you know so we're in the
Halstead School of where the mastectomy
was created where many of these things
were created but to really understand
the history of Barnard Fisher's role in
the mess that community it's just an
unbelievable story my only criticism was
at the time quite a depressing story
yeah you know I mean I'm not saying that
to be critical I mean is the criticism
of youth in the field no no it was to me
actually interestingly people often
bring this up idea up for me it was
actually it's far from a depressing
story it's just the opposite
in fact if we don't contend with the
question of how I mean the emperor of
all maladies just for people who don't
know is a history of cancer starting
from its first description in Egypt
right down to my own patients thousands
of years of a journey against a disease
that seems to morph in change over time
every time we look at it this has a new
form it reflects our own diversity to
some extent our own violinist our own
imagination as humans so to me not a
depressing book because it is a way to
look directly
Klee at the face of the enemy and I
don't find that depressing I find that
clarifying and there are many many high
points in this journey there's the
invention of the great surgeries that
save tens of thousands hundreds of
thousands of lives around the world the
dramatic advances against breast cancer
and most importantly against some
variants of leukemia whether mortality
was a hundred percent in 1950 and is
five or ten percent now 95 percent
change in mortality is a huge difference
in must rank is one of the great medical
inventions of our time so for me far
from a depressing book but a bit to me a
clarifying book that tries to clarify
why we're here today where we're going
what happens next
why we're not doing certain things why
we are doing certain things so that's my
impression of what happened at the end
of that book when did the idea to write
as it's really referred to the biography
of cancer when did that idea come to you
was it in your fellowship and your
training at something yeah I was
training and it was a very simple
moment actually I remember a woman who I
was treating for cancer came to me and I
was giving her yet another trial of
targeted therapy a new kind of therapy
and she finally sat down on one
afternoon and she said where are we
going with all of this why are we here
how do we get here and she was of course
asking it in a very personal level but
you could take that question and make it
a much much larger question where are we
going in this battle against cancer why
are we here today what happens next why
aren't we elsewhere how much of this is
the wildness of this family of diseases
how much of this is the capacity to use
our the greatest skills of our
imagination against this illness you
know in the 1930s 1940s 1950s when you
asked a child what the outer limit of
their scientific imagination was they
would say I want to be a rocket
scientist and I want to send a rocket to
the moon by the 1950s 60s 70s if you ask
that same child what the outer limits of
their scientific imagination would bring
to the world they would say I want to
cure cancer it began to define the
limits of our scientific prowess are the
limits of our imagination a world
without cancer so there is a sense in
which this is such an elemental
illness so much of our culture is now
defined through the lens of cancer and
what was shocking as a fellow and I
started encountering cancer in the
clinical sense was shocking was that
there was no such history that it was
all ad hoc and we knew little bits and
pieces of it was like looking at the
enemy through a patchwork quilt with
little holes in it and the attempt here
was to say well what is the full story
what does the story look like when did
this start why did we end up here what
happens tomorrow what happens way into
the future 100 years what will cancer
look like and a lot of thought
experiments go into the book so that's
sort of the genesis of the book and
that's how it came about
the research is also remarkable for a
book like that anyone who's read it will
appreciate and and again I think what's
nice is this is one of those books where
you can be an oncologist and read it and
find it staggering and you can be
someone who has lost a loved one to
cancer but wouldn't know the difference
between a sarcoma and a leiomyosarcoma
doesn't matter the book resonates which
obviously speaks to your ability to tell
a story and then that's sort of Tim he
what mind-boggling about that book is
the way and it's the same in the gene by
the ways that you weave in and out of a
personal story and then something that's
very dense scientifically and on a
personal level this is challenging
because I'm in the process as you know
of writing a book and doing a pretty
lousy job of it I think but it's this
challenge of you want to be able to do
the science justice but you need to
build a tell a story so how does the the
scientist Sid Mukherjee get along with
the writer Sid Mukherjee well I don't
think there are two separate people I
think they're integrated into one person
and that's very important there are many
people in my world they wrote as a
process of thinking Stephen Jay Gould
comes to mind not to draw a ludicrous
comparison Charles Darwin wrote to think
of Oliver Sacks
wrote to think I would suspect that Atul
Gawande writes to think I mean I know
it's also so the two people are
fundamentally not different people in my
brain in order to do the scientific work
that I do I need to think it through
often through the essays that I work on
and they inspire you know kind of yin
yang or roundabout way circular way ways
didn't find new ways of thinking about
the world
the cancer world so there isn't a
conflict I don't feel a conflict the
process is probably of interest I mean
the process is that when I started
writing Emperor I sort of made a
personal vow or a strategy in writing
that this was my first book I'd never
written a book before I wrote down some
principles or tenets that I would follow
and I've kept them in every book since
the first one was that there will be no
scientific abstraction but no place or
point shall you go through five pages or
three pages without there being a human
being in the middle of this I'm I'm a
translational researcher I'm a human
scientist and that meant that I've made
a personal promise that you wouldn't go
through five pages without understanding
what the payoff of these pages that
you've really worked your way through
often as a reader what the payoff is so
if you look carefully through that book
every five to seven pages the story
comes alive in a human story in a
scientific story and in a scientist
story they all intersect they and
sometimes through my stories there are
times that are tough when I'm writing
what the description the first
cancer-causing genes oncogenes and their
mutations it's tough to say well what's
the human being this is a laboratory
experiment in which you sprinkle tens of
thousands of bits of genetic material
onto cells and ask the question which
cells become turned from normal to
cancerous and that's the way you trap
one of these cancer-causing oncogenes
what's the human story behind well
they're two stories one story is quite
lovely it's the story of Bob Weinberg
the scientist who you know walking
through Boston in a snowstorm and
suddenly realizing not in a one-to-one
manner but this idea of sprinkling tens
of thousands of genes onto pieces of
genetic material onto cells like a
snowstorm of genes there's a kind of
congruence to that story it's not like
Bob Weinberg woke up one morning and saw
a snowstorm and said that's the
experiment I should do but there's a
kind of emotional congruence to the back
story of a scientist but then the second
story that illustrates this point is to
walk through a patient telescoping down
or other
Oh scoping down words from their outer
cancer a tumor a lump a mass that is
about to kill them a real patient of
mine a man with lung cancer and slowly
in that same story of this man's illness
began to microscope down to the fact
that he actually has in his cells this
mutant gene that Bob Weinberg once
caught in the snowstorm of sprinkling
genes on cells and all of a sudden this
man's cancer he's sitting in a room in
Boston surrounded by his family dying of
metastatic lung cancer but at the heart
at the root of that lung cancer is that
very same gene that very same oncogene
that was discovered described 1020 years
before in a paper in a kind of dry
abstract scientific paper and all of a
sudden that gene the genetic material
that can drive the growth of a normal
cell in being make it malignant making
metastatic so metastatic so malignant
that our best medicine our best minds
can't stop the growth of this aberrant
cell all being driven in part by that
very same gene that was trapped twenty
years ago in in a laboratory experiment
on rat cells so all of a sudden this
thing comes alive to you in a way that
it becomes consequential if you didn't
know the identity of the gene you would
not understand why on earth this 70 year
old man in perfectly good health he's
all of a sudden decimated by one or two
or four or eight mutant genes in his
cells that suddenly take over and drive
the growth of these cells anyway
that's one example and comes up over and
over again so that was the first tenet
that was the first what was the second
one
there are many so I'm not going to go
through all the tenets but the second
one was that this book all these books
should be fundamentally readable by
everyone you talked about this already
it should be like a kaleidoscope that if
you turn the book left words in you you
see it as an oncologist it's still
interesting the pattern changes if you
turn the book right words and say you're
an anthropologist it still is
interesting if you turn the kaleidoscope
upside down and shake it in and there's
a new pattern that's formed it's because
you're reading the book now
as a clinical scientist or you're
reading the book because your daughter
has leukemia and you're the father of a
patient with with leukemia or you're
reading it because you yourself have
been diagnosed with breast cancer or
your mother has and all of a sudden the
Kaleidoscope changes but the point is
that the object remains the same it's
the same book but you can read the book
in various different ways you can come
into a different ways often when I'm in
this sounds like a strange statement
often when I come back from the wards I
reread my own writing to figure out sort
of what was I thinking then in 2008 when
I wrote those sentences and how does
that change now has it really been ten
years soon ten years so I should tell
you that there will be a ten year update
to the emperor there'll be three other
three additional chapters I assume one
of them will be immunotherapy as an
update that's right so they're very
broadly three sections that are updated
and I've thought about it for a long
time so there'll be an updated section
on prevention
there'll be an updated section on early
detection and an updated section on
treatment so that's the very broad three
big broad chapters but in every chapter
there will be deeper dives into what's
happened now since the last ten years
and within the treatment section and
potentially within the prevention
section there'll be a huge role of the
immune system which was not fully
appreciated in 2010 I thought that was
the biggest distinction between the book
when I read it and then the PBS special
a Ken Burns special which of course
again will link to all of these things
in the show notes here but one you got
to read the book but - I can't recommend
enough the Ken Burns special they did an
unbelievable job I think sharing your
voice and that was the biggest I
remember watching it thinking oh wow
there's a big difference here because
there's a three installments or five I
can't repeat yet the third installment
felt like it was half immunotherapy it
was half a minute at people because part
of the reason was that again this brings
me to the next tenets in the book or
writing the book the next tenet was that
there's so much cancer research in
laboratories going on everywhere and the
tenets or the principle was that unless
that research has manifest itself in a
human drug in a human medicine in a
Rican ception of how
think about preventing treating or
detecting cancer in a fundamental
reconceptualize I D --is it won't get
into the book so tumor immunology of
course had been around for a very long
time Coley's toxins famously and another
such efforts very very early on but in
2010 we were at the edge of that moment
in which we began to use tumor
immunology in human beings as powerful
medicines to change the course of the
disease it was just the first trials
that come out and in fact the book was
completed in 2009 and the first trials
had not even come out then this is a
little funny trivia story that I'd
almost forgotten about this until
somebody mentioned it to me a year ago I
think the first real paper that I wrote
as a fellow was on ctla-4 it was looking
back at this series at NCI of patients
who had been given ctla-4 and responded
and this paper basically identified the
strong association between autoimmunity
and their response to it right of course
this will be interesting later in our
discussion because I want to of course
talk about James Allison so we'll come
back to that but you're right that was
sort of when it went from you had
interleukin 2 that worked in maybe 10%
15% of patients but you couldn't predict
why that was the bigger question you
didn't know why were some responding and
why were they only responding with
certain cancers to where we are today
where it's really been a transformation
in the last 15 years absolutely and so
when we started the film version of
emperor with Ken Burns which I obviously
was very close I work very closely with
Ken I should say that the gene is also
being made into film by Ken Burns oh my
god it's like Christmas all over again
it's almost completely shot we're sort
of moving towards that editing phases
and so forth but when can people expect
that movie it's already been scheduled I
think it's winter or fall 2019 so it's
on the skates on so what a year from now
yeah how about a year from now yeah
we're working through footage and
historical footage and archival footage
and so forth but to wind backwards the
crucial piece that had been added since
the book was of course immunological
therapy so much of what the last episode
was around this new burgeoning field I
mean in the first meeting that we had
around the transformation of the book
into the documentary film the first
thing that was raised is what's changed
and the answer was very obvious what's
let's go therapy it might have been
emphasized as much in the book and I may
have just missed it or it's possible you
also observed this as a change but I
believe it will factor into the 10th
edition which I can't wait to get my
hands on is the role of obesity in
cancer as if I recall in the documentary
you said look this is now becoming
basically the second leading preventable
cause of cancer after smoking which was
again I was aware of that at that point
in time because of the work that I'd
been doing and sort of my little echo
chamber but I thought this is a PBS bet
this is not something that I think most
people would appreciate this is becoming
a first for many people to hear that's
right and the one thing that we should
make clear is that every word in that
PBS document was vetted by some of the
most important and thoughtful scientists
and cancer biologists and physicians and
physician scientists and cancer
advocates across the world there's a
backstory in other words the script was
vetted over and over again so that we
wouldn't say things that were
misinforming the public or or because
this is this is documentaries for all
time Ken Burns's workers evergreen
hopefully my work is evergreen so it was
very very carefully vetted and it was
quite clear by the time the documentary
came out that the signals that we were
picking up around obesity and cancer
were becoming extraordinarily clear for
some cancers obviously not for other
cancers and the provocative statement
that sits behind all of this is that
really since the last 20 odd years I
mean even 30 odd years we have been
struggling struggling to find
preventable human chemical carcinogens
of substantial impact every word in that
sentence is important we have certainly
found chemical new chemical carcinogens
in humans but often in that effect small
pockets of people who are exposed to
those carcinogens we have found lots and
lots of chemical carcinogens which have
moderate to a very small impact if you
look at populations overall the bar
might be smoking so smoking is a is a
good bar this is a smoking or tobacco
smoke is a chemical carcinogen which is
removable or preventable and
has substantial human impact across
populations changing smoking behavior
can change fundamentally the
epidemiology of cancers across nations
if that bar is smoking we have struggled
for the last 20 odd years to find things
of that magnitude and effect the direct
impact of that is when people come to me
and they say well what do you do to
prevent cancer in yourself and your
family I have to sort of casually or not
so casually admit that not Ray Mabus Lee
don't smoke but it's not like I'm eating
goji berries or avoiding some
fundamental thing that everyone else is
not in the know about because there
aren't any I mean you know I'm obviously
not exposing myself to these rare
unusual occupational cancer carcinogenic
agents but I'm not doing something
fundamentally changed that's different
from you or anyone else to prevent
cancer the exception to this rule of the
20 odd years of the hunt for chemical
carcinogens is obesity now you and I can
have a debate is obesity a chemical
carcinogen no not in the traditional
sense
is it even preventable maybe but we have
to think twice or three times about it
there's a role of genetics and
environment in all of this and even do
we think it's obesity per se or
hyperinsulinemia or any other endocrine
exactly or first of all is in an
endocrine problem is an inflammatory
problem or is it a metabolic problem at
least 300 BC is such a a such a crude
phenotype that's right there at least
your point has at least three if not six
underlying phenotypes that each of which
mechanistically would make a lot of
sense
that's why celebrating cancer is a
naming a logical phenomenon that is the
cytokines the inflammatory all this
going back to your general point that
obesity was becoming identified more and
more clearly as one of the potential
causes of cancer or I should say
strongly correlated with the development
of cancer so strongly that we think that
there's a causal link based on all
everything that we know about
epidemiology some cancers that we began
to take this seriously and we're still
taking it seriously but as you're
pointing out there are several horns
underneath that blanket of obesity that
we understand very crudely and we've to
figure out which of these is driving the
cancer risk I would like to spend the
next six hours discussing with you the
tenants of writing for selfish reasons
but instead I'll punt that to
we'll do we'll have dinner in a couple
of weeks and we'll finish that
discussion I want to talk about another
book you wrote that doesn't get as much
attention which is the laws of Medicine
you wrote that after Emperor before the
gene correct that's right so the laws of
medicine has a very different mandate as
it were and that's because the book came
out in associated with Ted
they had commissioned ten books by ten
thinkers around the world and they asked
me to write a book up on that and ice
it's necessarily a small book it's
really a you know the mandate was to
write basically a 75-page book expanding
on a single very very incisive idea so
that's the laws of Medicine yes if I if
I got them correctly the three laws are
a strong intuition is much more powerful
than a weak test uh-huh
how did you think of that and what is
the most important application of that
law to the way you think about medicine
or specifically oncology today this to
me is one of the great neglected ideas
in medicine perhaps one of the great
neglecting ideas in the world this idea
initially comes from Thomas Bayes this
is a Bayesian idea Thomas Bayes was a
cleric but by evening he was a
mathematician and an economist and he
let his work leads to one of the most
seminal and funny thought experiments
that I've ever encountered which is the
following and I
I sometimes quiz my my daughters with it
which is the following this is not
Thomas Bayes his own example but it
arises out of Thomas bases work and he
one might imagine going to a street fair
and encountering a man who's tossing
coins and he tosses coins and your job
is to predict whether the next flip coin
flip is gonna be heads or tails and so
he tosses the coin 20 times and all 20
times its tail's
so then he turns to the crowd and he
says what's the next coin flip going to
be heads or tails
now the mathematician in the crowd who's
the professor of mathematics says 50%
says 50% and you know everyone says
absolutely right but the child in the
crowd says no no you don't understand
this is a stupid problem it's the coins
rigged the coin has only it has two
heads or two tails as case may be and
the child is right and what's important
about that insight is that the
mathematician imagines the world this in
this case this is not a stab at
mathematicians in general but the
professor of mathematics
thinks of the world as having no history
as having no a priori x' it's a world
that's created in over every time the
coin is flipped in its heads and tails
equal every time but the child knows and
I all humans know that in fact the world
doesn't behave like that everything has
priors and you need to understand those
priors before you can understand the
posteriors there's wisdom in that idea
and it took someone like Thomas Bayes to
figure that out that most of our lives
we aren't living our lives like the
crazy mathematician professor we are
living our lives like the child we're
thinking to ourselves what was the prior
antecedent imagine this is true for any
corner of your life
the first question you ask yourself when
you're trying to solve a problem try to
understand the cosmos trying to
understand something you ask yourself
what was the prior life did the Sun set
in the West last night and how about the
night before and maybe I don't need to
create a formula to figure out whether
the Sun is gonna set on the west or the
east tomorrow it's because it's set on
the west every time they're obviously
loopholes and gaps to this kind of
thinking they're surprises that you can
miss so bases fundamental idea was that
you can only interpret a test in the
light of what that test is predicted in
the past it's an extraordinarily
important idea in the way we think about
about the universe that the past
performance of a test tells you
something not everything but tells you
something about the future performance
of a test and you can apply to many many
things in the world you can apply to any
kind of thinking economic economic
thinking climate change oriented
thinking that the past is a guide to the
future not only in a kind of loose way
but you're really using a rheostat
weighted strongly by the past and this
of course applies to medicine and it's a
forgotten rule in medicine although it
does seem like one of the things that
I've always felt physicians innately
do well without realizing it which is
the opposite of where I want to be not
to take the potshots but I think where
we do very poorly isn't understanding
asymmetric risk so Nassim Taleb has
written a lot about asymmetric risk and
I think he's absolutely right to be
critical of not just physicians but
basically most people so so my argument
is we are innate
wired to be Bayesian we are absolutely
not innately wired to appreciate risk
and both of these are important that's
right so one of them we have to hone so
much more because I think it just
doesn't come naturally I played a funny
experiment which you'll appreciate I'll
send you the list and you'll have a
field day with it it's 20 questions and
each one is a quantitative question with
an answer but they're not obvious you
would never it's not like how many you
know presidents were there or something
where you might know the answer you
asked the group we're gonna give you
these 20 questions I want you to answer
each question not with a number but with
a 95% confidence and I think you know
the game no I don't know that ok so
interesting game so at the end of 20
questions if you've done it correctly
you should have 19 out of 20 of those
ranges correct I've never met a person
who can come close you almost without
exception get like seven of the twenty
right you can't even contemplate what
that variability is so the second law
was that normals teach us rules outliers
teach us laws so this of course these
were very carefully the mess I thought
I've spent a lot of time thinking about
them of course this is the anti Bayesian
law this is the exactly what you're
talking about this is the idea that
simultaneously in a medical brain has to
live the idea that the Bayesian idea
that when you hear hooves think horses
not zebras famous medical tenets
hoof beats outside your window are
likely to be horses they're very
unlikely to be zebras the second law is
once in a while they are zebras and you
need tools you need special ideas
special tools to figure out what these
outliers look like who they are how to
find them and how to quickly find them
so that you can identify them and triage
them differently so in some ways these
two laws are yin-yang they polarize
against each other and what's
interesting about them is that they both
in medicine can both can be
simultaneously true in the same way as
our assumption of asymmetric risk is
simultaneously true with the idea that
our understanding of the base of a world
in a bayesian way is helpful and
important so the second law is about how
to identify outliers how outliers tell
us about the nature of normalcy how they
tell us about how complex in
Asians can produce occasional far
outsiders and how those outsiders really
challenged us to define what these
interactions look like in real life I
mean this simple example is it's very
very hard to figure out the genetics of
any disease without finding the rare
people who have the disease as a
consequence of a mutation the classic
example of course is that we would not
have an idea how to regulate our body or
to prevent heart attacks if we hadn't
paid extraordinarily close attention to
a small family small groups of families
that had a mutation in the gene that
controls cholesterol metabolism most
people don't have this mutation because
those families are quickly extinguished
we think because they died of heart
attacks they have all sorts of problems
they die of heart attacks but by paying
extreme attention to this one family
that has a mutation they're rare
scientists all of a sudden uncovered a
whole cosmos in which we understand now
cholesterol metabolism and because of
that cholesterol metabolism other
scientists eventually developed the
first statins so all of this you know
the fact that hundreds of thousands of
people in the world are taking this
medicine to prevent heart attacks tracks
back to a rare family where because of a
genetic mutation they had a very very
high risk of cardiac disease and of
course now we know there's a whole
family of those people there's at least
2,000 of those mutations that produce
that phenotype and these natural
experiments are actually a remarkable
thing and of course to bring it back to
the gene to now have a tool a probe to
be able to explore that is amazing the
third law for every perfect or
exceptional medical experiment there is
there's a human bias that goes along
with it again these are unique to
medicine and what's interesting about
them is that they are unique to me at
least what's interesting is that that
they're unique to the day to day
practice of medicine but they apply for
every I think they apply to every corner
of life you don't have to be a doctor to
realize that for every every time we
think of something if you're really
skeptical thinkers we have to think
about the bias that comes intrinsically
with that thought in other words every
single declarative claim about the
universe that we're making must have
necessarily a declarative bias that
comes with it they're matched if you
want to be a scientist you want to be a
skeptic your real job aside from being
creative and designing experiments is to
find for every single declarative claim
that you're making the bias that's drive
sitting like a little devil buried
inside that declarative thing because I
promise you everyone has one each one of
these claims has one and Richard Fineman
who listeners of this podcast know is
one of my heroes one of my kids is named
after him he named Fineman or Richard
his middle name is find I see yeah and
my wife at first was like why would we
do that but then once she had read
surely you're joking mr. Fineman a
couple of times because she'd read it
once before she realized why but Fineman
said eloquently right the job on science
is not to fool yourself and you're the
easiest person to fool that's right so
to your point the only thing I would
disagree with what you've said said is I
don't think these are unique to medicine
I think these are laws of science
alright and it may be laws of life on
some yeah so the mandate here really was
to use this book as a kind of
springboard to challenge the way we
think about virtually all aspects of of
how we live you're gonna read an article
in The New York Times tomorrow that will
make some claims about some politicians
somewhere in Oklahoma or you're gonna
read about an economic paper that is now
being presented to the feds and your job
is to be adequately skeptical about it
and understand what are the priors how
do we explain this particular fact based
on the priors or the prior to the priors
matter to use a very topical example
there's someone's past behavior in
college or in school high school tell us
about how he or she is gonna be a
judicial candidate or does their
behavior under scrutiny in any way
predict their behavior when no one's
looking that's right that's another
question the second question that you
might ask here is again it's an outlier
question right scrutiny versus not
scrutiny are they do they become
outliers to themselves if they're
scrutinized if they're versus when
they're not scrutinized and the third
question is when I read this story what
are my biases am i reading it because
I'm a man am i reading it because I have
a particular experience of my in my own
lifetime myself my sister my my daughter
my
friend my colleague is that coloring the
way that I read this particular story so
absolutely and you know this thinking
goes on over and over again this these
are circular processes do those biases
of priors do the priors have biases and
so forth so you can use these I mean I I
certainly use these tools in clinical
yeah it's a beautiful as you said it's a
very short book but again well we'll
certainly make sure people have this
link to it because I I think it's a
great way of teaching people how to
think and that's again I just don't
think we're innately wired for every
facet of thinking now going back to your
background in immunology very recently
we had a very exciting for those of us
in this space very exciting Nobel Prize
awarded I mean it was as we were
discussing before we started recording
it wasn't so much around immunotherapy
but a very specific element of it which
are the development of checkpoint
inhibitors two of them in particular
were basically acknowledged here that
ctla-4 which I mentioned earlier
NPD one tell me why these are so
exciting they're exciting for many
reasons they are exciting for again some
history and some background as the story
as it were is exciting because if you
ask the question in the 1990s what's the
relationship between cancer and the
immune system you get a kind of diffuse
answer you'd get an answer which could
be very unclear because there were all
sorts of complicated lines of evidence
one line of evidence was that in
patients with the complete collapse of
the immune system such as patients with
HIV or complete collapse of at least of
one wing of the immune system they would
get these cancers you've nobody else
could get but what's interesting about
them and this is where the thought
experiment this is with the brain cells
start sort of ticking and wandering they
would typically get viral cancers
viruses that would now get unleashed we
now know many of them viruses like human
papilloma virus they would get cervical
cancers they would get anal cancers so a
lot of viral cancers but patients with
HIV did not generally get lung cancer I
never thought of that said so we have
enough data to know that they either at
no greater prevalence or even at a lower
prevalence when you start to talk about
you know for example lung cancer or GB
or
kradic cancer I never thought about you
know it's a very important so the data
are mixed because of course in the 1980s
they weren't living long enough so all
that we know is that the first groups of
cancers that cropped up in these men and
women were not lung cancers that were
not pancreatic cancer so at the first
pass with that cut short data set you
might begin to imagine then if that's
the case the immune system completely
collapses you only get a certain kind of
cancer then what is the possible role of
the immune system in in cancer control
and Yuma if you were in a list you might
have given up in the 1990s and said well
you know take the whole immune system
away and nothing really happens
even with this cut-short data set so
maybe there isn't such a complex
interaction well it turns out that
people like Jim Allison and his Japanese
colleague did not put the immune system
away they put that data aside said this
goes back to the laws of Medicine they
said sure it tells you a little bit but
I didn't tell you the full story the
full story turns out with there's one
layer deeper and the full story turns
out that in people who don't have a
collapse of the immune system whose
immune system is otherwise intact cancer
cells not not all cancers but some
cancers make specific factors in fact
they evolved in the world make is the
wrong word here they evolve so that they
put up specific factors put up specific
signals that inactivate the immune
system or that make the immune system no
longer able to kill or recognize the
cancer cell and the identification of
these specific pathways these specific
factors was what led to the Nobel Prize
because in further work Jim Allison and
and again his colleagues as a big wide
field showed that if you inactivate
these specific factors if you drive
nails through them using a variety of
methods then all of a sudden the cancers
become Reeve is about to the immune
system and the immune system can attack
and kill the cancer cells now why is it
exciting exactly exciting for many
reasons first of all it's important to
realize that not all cancers respond we
don't know why some do and some don't
melanoma is highly responsive it's an
immunological engaged tumor is it
because the melanoma has
many antigens that it will suddenly be
more recognizable is it because the skin
is such a lymphoid organ is it the right
environment we don't know all of these
questions the other thing to realize is
that people have responses and some
people continue to respond some other
people sadly will relapse and they'll go
you know the cancers will start growing
back in the context of their re-educated
immune system and that leads to the
second question which is what happens
then is there a second pathway and this
is an important idea I think that goes
back to your first question which is
about whether this is depressing or not
the important thing is once you drive a
single stake through cancers heart
it's like placing the first crampon on a
climb you see if there's no crampon
that's placed on the climb you can't
climb a mountain it seems like a wall
it's a blank wall and you don't know
where to go left or whether to go right
or what to do once you plant that first
cramp on try that it sticks and it
sticks you all of a sudden the whole
face of the mountain becomes too
different now it's a different mountain
now because now you can ask the question
because the first crampon was planted in
that particular place and it's stuck and
it's deaf I have a new vantage point
exact perspective has changed that's
right and so this is the important piece
to realize about cancer research and
perhaps about all research is that the
first crampon or the first stake through
cancers heart is an incredibly important
stake because then you can ask what i
call linear questions before that first
one is placed the questions are
nonlinear you don't know where to place
it the whole map is open once you drive
a stake through the first question the
world becomes more linear you can may
now ask the question what's the
mechanism of resistance to that and when
you do find that what's the mechanism
resists to that and so all of a sudden
the perspective is different because
you've climbed through that first and
that's usually where the Nobel prizes
are given your Nobel prizes are given
often for planting the first stake
through the heart of a disease through
the heart of a problem and that's why
this Nobel Prize is important it's not
of course as you're saying this does not
incur the field of tumor immunology in
general there is it's a wide field our
own lab does a whole bunch of work into
minimun immunology but we're put on the
shoulders of those prior giants as it
were and so that's the recognition
that's been given you said something
that I think is so
important and worth reiterating there's
also something about immunology and
immunotherapy that's quite interesting
as far as planting that stake which is
the durability of response it is often
the case that when you have an immune
illogic remission it is a durable
remission and it's not always the case
but it is much more likely the case than
when you say for example see a chemo
therapeutic remission or even a surgical
remission on a personal level I have a
very close friend who was diagnosed with
colon cancer 10 years ago at a very
young age you know he might have been 40
and that was unusual in and of itself I
remember talking I went to the hospital
when he had his colectomy spoke with the
surgeon after it sounded like a horrible
case huge tumor the mesentery was full
of nodes which I assumed would be
positive every 26 node sampled all came
back negative huh my friend was adopted
we later realized he had Lynch syndrome
eight years later he goes on to develop
pancreatic adenocarcinoma unresectable
so it's encased the mesenteric vessels
he cannot have a Whipple procedure and
as you know and unfortunately many
people listening to this will know that
is a death sentence yeah that's a
non-negotiable you will not be alive in
nine months and he was put on an anti
pd-1 therapy because he happened to have
as you would know these patients with
Lynch are gonna be much more likely to
be susceptible to checkpoint inhibitors
two years later he's disease-free okay
just unbelievable stories yeah and I
think your point is an elegant one that
I'd never really thought of before which
is focused less on the fact that we
haven't solved the problem and more on
the fact that we have made a finite and
real step towards establishing a new
place a new location for which to view
this disease that's right so I described
this as taking a nonlinear problem into
a linear problem now of course the
answers are often not linear per se but
it gives you a route and we will come
back to the metabolism study that we did
with Luc Antley that is a great example
of taking a nonlinear problem and
converting it to a linear problem now
I'll tell you about that in a second but
anytime this was the place with Vivek -
let's tell people what Gleevec is yeah
it is a good example of a drug where we
learned to target a mutant cancer gene
and actually the gene product so in that
case the
answer it's a blood cancer called
chronic myelogenous leukemia was also a
death sentence and also GI stromal
tumors NGS trauma to museum chronic
myelogenous leukemia was a death
sentence people had to go through
transplants I've watched probably a
dozen in the pre Gleevec era dozen
patients died of chronic myelogenous
leukemia or the complications of
transplant
I trained briefly as a transplant er and
then all of a sudden through the work of
many people including Brian Druker that
drug was discovered so before that
scientists figured out based on very
careful genetic analysis that the tumor
was being driven by really the work of
one gene and the gene was called BCR
Abel it's and it's an oncogene it's a
not found in normal cells but found in
these cancer cells and the product of
that gene became like a like an engine
like a manic engine that was driving
these blood cells to go crazy and make
more blood cells and proliferate and
proliferate and proliferate and it was
this engine gone wild inside a cell and
every time the cell asked the question
should i / than looking at its normal
state or nutrients metabolic state etc
the only answer I would ever get was
from this engine saying yes go ahead and
make another cell divide etcetera etc
etc so this was identified that the
exact the gene product was I didn't find
a protein product of the gene was
identified and then through an elaborate
series of experiments in circumstances
chemists found a way to actually Jam the
engine one molecule human beings may we
stitch this molecule together it's a
remarkable achievement and once the
engine is jammed which suddenly turns
out that the disease goes into remission
this was one of the first examples there
others of so-called targeted therapy
where you take you synthesize a chemical
to Jam cancers engines in a cancer
specific way it doesn't affect normal
cells but what's interesting about that
is that some people develop resistance
because the engine cancer cells evolve
and they find a way of resisting but
that resistance it becomes a linear
problem you figure out what the
mechanism the resistance is and you
drive a second stake through cancer
heart and when it becomes resistant to
that he drive a third stake and so forth
so all of a sudden the problem would
seem like a big blank Rock became a
linear problem so that that goes back to
another example of how that first
mistake or the first crampon really
helps with the problem and now for
immunotherapy immunological therapy the
roadmap is much clearer why do some
tumors responded by some don't respond
visit a question of the environment that
the tumor is sitting in is that blood
vessels is that tumor cells is it immune
cells these are answerable questions
these are so called linear questions but
the first big step here was to define
the problem this is really a nice step
off to exactly where I know we want to
go which is we've got surgical
oncologists medical oncologists
radiation oncologists in many ways a
subset now of medical oncology is immuno
based on ecology the work that you Lou
and many others are now doing is
potentially a another branch of oncology
called metabolic oncology so you're
beyond gracious in your suggesting I
have even something to do with helping
that evening turn into a what sounds
like a very productive collaboration
between you and Lou and I'll be talking
with Lou as well when the next month I'm
sure but let's talk a little bit about
what came out of that collaboration and
certainly bring it back to Ben Hopkins
paper that was in nature I believe was
the nature yeah exactly yeah so let's
talk a little bit about the question
what were you trying to understand the
question is there's a very wide question
and there's a very narrow question the
wide question is how does the body's
metabolic state affect cancer it's a
very big question because cancer is like
all cells are eating nutrients as well
too in order to grow and the question
therefore is the cancer eating a
different set of nutrients than normal
cells this work goes back to famous work
by Otto Warburg done in the early
nineteen
where Otto Warburg was one of the first
people to make the hypothesis that
there's something fundamentally
different about I mean we won't go into
great details but it's fundamentally
different in which the cancer cells
metabolize compared to normal cells they
use fundamentally different pathways to
metabolize and if you could find a way
to target these metabolic alterations in
cancer cells you would find an
anti-cancer drug so but that question
has been hanging around our field for a
long time and as our understanding of
normal metabolism has changed we've
begun to identify not just one
dozens of nutrient pathways that cancers
use that may or may not be different
from normal cells may be slightly
different from normal cells may be a lot
different from normal cells so that's
one big question the second question
which is a slightly narrower question is
that when you give a drug
whatever drug it might be your favorite
chemotherapy your favorite drug any drug
does it change the metabolism of the
cancer cell and does it change the
metabolism of the body and could this be
a mechanism by which cancer cells become
sensitive or resistance to chemotherapy
so these are two related questions again
to reiterate one question is how is the
cancer cells metabolism different from
the normal cell in normal circumstances
and the second question is how is the
cancer cells metabolism differ from a
normal cell in the context of giving a
drug in other words can a nutritional
state be exploited and or a drug
sensitivity be exploited through nature
exactly those are the two questions so
we focused in this particular site we
actually are interested in both I'm
interested in both but we focus on the
second question and the second question
in this particular case was that there
was a very promising group of medicines
that was being used in clinic in fact I
had used them as a trial list they had
come really out of Luke Han Lee's path
defining work he had defined the pathway
or the signals that these medicines
attack and there was an enormous amount
of optimism because this was considered
a fundamental pathway this is the beauty
by the way of being in a place like New
York or Boston it's you can talk about
someone doing this pioneering Lu was in
Boston when much of this work is done
he's now here in New York and you don't
have to collaborate with a guy across
the world let's collaborate with the
guys on the Upper East Side instead of
Chelsea that's right so lose work over
the last decades had been to define this
pathway and ultimately led to the
formation of the creation of these new
medicines they're called pi3 kinase
inhibitors and they go by fancy names
like develop and things like that but
anyway when they came to clinic
surprisingly there were some responses
but there was a lot of resistance in
patients that tumors were resistant to
the drugs and didn't respond and that
was a puzzle that Lou had come up with
in his own work and then separately
seven miles of town I was scratching my
head about
same puzzle because I'd been using these
same drugs in cancer patients and
finding that patients became resistant
or were resistant to start and so what
was chalked out that on a napkin that
evening was we had thought of lots of
ways that these patients had could
become resistant we had thought oh maybe
the tumor had a mutation well and
there's one other point I guess to add
just that we remember but maybe it's
worth reiterating is a lot of the
patients that were on these begin to
develop phenotype like they look like
they were diabetic so that's the point
that I was coming to in a second we
didn't know what if that meant that that
was the source of the resistance that
was a true true and unrelated yeah the
question was was a true true and
unrelated mean you can think of many
other mechanisms of resistance you can
say the tumors became a quarter mutation
you could say the host had some problem
you could write down on a piece of paper
thousand ways and those were the
traditional ways that one would explain
resistance the traditional ways of
thinking about tumor resistance is
mutation the host eats up the drug the
non-traditional way and this is what the
innovation in the study was that what if
there's diabetes that we were observing
the high levels of sugar and the high
levels of insulin insulin being the most
important piece of this what if the drug
was causing diabetes separately from the
tumor given to normal people that the
drug would cause diabetes in some people
worse than others and that diabetic
phenotype a diabetic state the
hyperinsulinemic state was being used or
exploited by the tumor to essentially
become resistant to the drug it's a
little bit like in the analogy that I
drew I remember on the napkin it's funny
I still remember the table we saw the
drawing so Lou and I were batting this
idea back and forth while you you were
eating nothing and the idea was that to
me reminded me of the famous story of
the woodcutter who's sitting on a tree
limb and chops off his own limb and
falls down and I drew this picture I
remember of the woodcutter on a tree
limb because what happens is that the
body mounts an insulin emic response to
the drug that insulin emic response goes
to the cancer and starts feeding the
cancer and then the cancer becomes
resistant so you essentially undo all
the good that you've done with the drug
by cutting off your own limb because of
this entry
circuit and the long and short of it is
that that's basically in animal models
that happens to be true so we showed it
using formal systems and formal methods
that this insulin amia is a consequence
of the drug has nothing to do with the
tumour has nothing to do with anything
else if you give the drug the drug goes
into the liver and the pancreas and
causes a sort of a pre-diabetic State
that's often worsened that if you're
already in a pre-diabetic State this
hyperinsulinemia is used then by the
tumor to become resistant even while the
drug is present it becomes a pathway by
which the tumor becomes resistant and
most interestingly that you can paralyze
this resistance by putting animals on a
ketogenic diet so basically there's
never any sugar source to drive the
insulin you blunt the insulin response
so acutely that you can no longer get
the insulin high again this is not to be
confused with with the idea that this is
a sugar feeding tumor idea this is not a
sugar feeding tumor paradigm because to
be clear on a ketogenic diet your
glucose levels might go down from normal
but it's not an enormous reduction even
in a complete fast you'll still maintain
at least three millimolar of glucose
it's the insulin that becomes virtually
unmeasurable that's right so it's and
this is an insulin feeding the tumor
question and so I think that three
points that need to be made about the
study to be very clear first of all it's
an animal study we're now launching a
human study that will launch in November
with patients with lymphomas endometrial
cancer and breast cancer particularly a
triple negative breast cancer I'm very
keen on studying because this is a
cancer that has so few options that's
right there very very few options so
that's the human study the second point
that it's worthwhile making is that it's
sort of like folks don't try this at
home this is a very particular study
with a very particular drug on cancers
combined with a diet the study only
worked when the drug in the diet were
combined it does not mean that the
ketogenic diet is gonna prevent cancer
we don't know this it's an open question
we're actually studying that separately
yeah and I want to talk just a little
bit about that paper because that's boy
I sure want everyone to make sure they
hear that loud and clear cuz few things
upset me more than when I spend a little
too much time on Twitter and I come
across people who seem to want to claim
that if you're on a ketogenic diet you
can't get cancer or if you have cancer
just go on a ketogenic diet that's not
to in fact to be very clear but
study in fact demonstrated that that was
not the case not only that the study
also demonstrates that some cancer
models including leukemia is accelerated
on the keto diet in fact we have a big
follow-up study to try to figure out why
some cancers are accelerated by keto
alone but when you combine it with the
drug they actually go back down into he
permission the third point to make is
that it seems to be mutation agnostic
and that by that I mean this is a very
important idea which is that twelve
tumor models responded twelve I was not
aware that it was that high yeah twelve
and actually all 12 that we tested
responded every one of them responded
and it didn't matter what oncogenes you
had or what tumor suppressor genes were
mutated they all responded to different
levels leukemias respond they become
then they'd relapse at least in the
models endometrial cancers we can't get
them to grow pancreatic cancers respond
extremely strongly so it's another
example where you're not targeting it
seems the mutation this is not like
Gleevec in which you're driving a stake
into the engine of the cancer or that
engine there this is a much more global
yeah it's solved yeah it's a much more
global assault in fact in some ways it's
parallel akin to this immunotherapy in
the sense that it the immune system
doesn't care if you have wrath or
doesn't seem to care at the first
approximation whether you have a
mutation in one gene or another gene
grass or not grass it will kill the
tumor cells based on its characteristics
of what it sees in the tumor similarly
here the metabolism seems to be tumor
wide but not single kinds of cancer
specific we don't know this to be the
case the thirteenth model that we try
will may be this was the one that not
won't work but this has generated a lot
of excitement for this reason you know I
have a friend who has definitely her2
new positive maybe er positive PR
negative but has stage four breast
cancer is in a pH 3 K inhibitor trial
out of Dana Farber has been on the trial
for probably five years she's the only
survivor here's the interesting thing
she's been on a ketogenic low
carbohydrate diet the entire time while
she was taking inhibitor yes okay she's
still on the interval and so what's
interesting is I've told Lou about her
case yeah because she's fastidious in
this and she's able to get her
hemoglobin a1c now under six which for
many of those patients is very difficult
talked to you
you me and Sid had lunch once about two
years ago this is the very first time
you ever showed me the day yeah that's
right we were on a computer we were at
that Indian place or the Chinese place
on Second Avenue that's right yeah and
when you showed me those data I just
immediately thought of her so it's
actually been on my list who introduced
Luke because she doesn't live in New
York but no enough tonight I want to
bring her out and I want you guys to
meet her because yeah the combination of
his pi3k inhibitor and this dietary
choice she's made going back to your
second rule right she's the outlier that
is right that is giving you something to
probe yeah we hopefully will have many
such patients I don't know you know this
is why we're running the study Syd as
you can probably imagine I could spend
another 12 hours speaking with you but I
want to be respectful of your time I
know we're a little late in the day we
got a later start than we wanted and
you've got a long trip home and I want
you to get to see your family the last
question I want to ask you really is one
that I need you to be a little bit
immodest with which is how do you do
what you do I don't meet a lot of people
that I look at and realize that on every
level of their life they are better than
me you know usually I meet people and
it's like yeah they're better at me at
those three things but I can do this one
thing better and and I'm sure I could
think of something I do better than you
but it's many things I don't know about
sense of balance I can probably shoot a
bow and arrow better than you but when I
think about how you balance the devotion
you have to your patience to your family
to your research to your writing
it humbles me I don't know have you put
any thought into that the fact that you
created these tenants around writing is
very interesting to me it says that you
you aren't just a natural gifted guy
that fell out of this guy who figured
out how to write you know you had to
work at your craft yeah so how do you
work at this craft of just excellence in
general the simple rules that I have is
I'm a very question and project driven
person
if I set projects I'll usually fulfill
them again it's the same set of crampon
in the mountain rule which is that in
order to write a book you have to write
the first line of the book and
inevitably that's not going to be the
first line that survives in order to do
research you have to do one experiment
and inevitably that experience gonna not
work out you're gonna do 10 15
iterations of etc to me the fundamental
rule that works for me is just to throw
something at the world
first line the first experiment the
first idea and then keep at it I keep at
it over and over again I come back to it
I come back to it over and over again
and I keep asking questions and then at
some point of time and that's another
moment of sensitivity is to figure out
when the work speaks back to you the
experiment starts talking back to you
have to be really open your ears have to
be really open and that's really the
skill of a scientist I think the
scientist I think has or even a writer
they have really two skills and that
they mix together the first one is the
creative step putting out the first line
thinking of the idea you know I'm gonna
write a biography of cancer I'm going to
write the history of genetics etc but
the second one is to be open enough to
realize when the work starts speaking
back to you and let that happen
let the experiments start talking back
to you be skeptical if I have a
conversation with it those I think are
the two skills that I sort of bring to
my puzzle the rest of it is just like
everyone else trying to balance eating a
meal versus you know writing in two more
lines stopping starting sleeping the
usual
well said I don't expect this will be
the last time we sit down and do this
I'm gonna be a lot more stuff to talk
about I can't thank you enough I
consider you Lou I mean that some of the
other folks we talk about I mean real
mentors of mine and it's it's a it's a
vital äj-- it's a real privilege to call
you a friend and to be able to sit down
with you and just even the tiniest
insight into is that your work yeah
thank you you can find all of this
information and more at Peter Tiye MD
com forward slash podcast there you'll
find the show notes readings and links
related to this episode you can also
find my blog and the nerd Safari at
Peter T IME com
what's a nerd Safari you ask just click
on the link at the top of the site to
learn more maybe the simplest thing to
do is to sign up for my subjective lean
on lame once a week email where I'll
update you on what I've been up to the
most interesting papers I've read and
all things related to longevity science
performance sleep etc on social you can
find me on Twitter Instagram and
Facebook all with the ID Peter attea and
but usually Twitter is the best way to
reach me to share your
Shenzhen Commons now for the obligatory
disclaimer this podcast is for general
informational purposes only and does not
constitute the practice of medicine
nursing or other professional health
care services including the giving of
medical advice and note no
doctor-patient relationship is formed
the use of this information and the
materials link to the podcast is at the
user's own risk the content of this
podcast is not intended to be a
substitute for professional medical
advice diagnosis or Treat users should
not disregard or delay in obtaining
medical advice for any medical condition
they have and should seek the assistance
of their healthcare professionals for
any such conditions lastly and perhaps
most importantly I take conflicts of
interest very seriously for all of my
disclosures the companies I invest in
and/or advise please visit Peter attea
MD com forward slash about
[Music]